Add SDK span processors spec (#205)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification: specification/sdk-span-processors.md

> # Span processor

Reviewer: How to register a `Span processor`?
Do we allow multiple processors? (is there any guarantee on the ordering).

Author: I think we could guarantee the order. I have added this:

`Span processors can be registered via a method on SDK Tracer. The registered processors are invoked in the same order as they were registered.`

Reviewer: Thanks @pavolloffay for answering the 2nd question.
Regarding the 1st question "How to register a `Span` processor", do you intend to cover it in a separate PR for the `Tracer` API change? Do we expect both `register` and `unregister` (or only allow to register during the Tracer initialization/ctor)?

Reviewer 2: Currently I implemented this with only Register and can be done at any moment.

Author: I have already documented the registration step. Here is the copy but please comment on the code if something should be fixed.

> Span processors can be registered directly on SDK Tracer. The processors are invoked in the same order as they were registered.

> Span processor is an interface which allows synchronous hooks for span start and end method invocations.

Reviewer 3: Span processors can also be asynchronous. See https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java/pull/468.

Author: I am removing it from here. 
The method docs cover that executions should not be blocking.
```
This method is called synchronously on the execution thread, therefore it should not block or throw an exception.

```

The span processors are invoked only on sampled spans.

## Interface definition

> ### OnStart(SpanData)

Reviewer 4: Why SpanData?

Author: tracing-api doc references it https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/master/specification/api-tracing.md#spandata. It's a readable span object.

Reviewer 5: > The span processors are invoked only on sampled spans.

Although this is what the exporters defined by the SDK will do, I don't feel is really a requirement - after all, sampling exists as a hint (as of now).

> `OnStart` is called when a span is started and `Span.isRecordingEvents()` is true. 

Reviewer 6: `isRecordingEvents` seems like documenting the java implementation. In practice, is this the same as saying that the span is sampled?

Author: Agree I will change that

Author: Actually, we don't need it here at all. The first section mentions that processors are invoked only on sampled spans

This method is called synchronously on the execution thread, therefore it should not block or throw an exception.

**Parameters:**

> * `SpanData` - a readable span object.

Reviewer 6: I don't know if it's kosher to change the spec to suit pending RFCs, but https://github.com/open-telemetry/rfcs/pull/8 suggests this might have to be changed to "span" soon.

Author: https://github.com/open-telemetry/rfcs/pull/8 It talks about removing it from the API, it might happen that it will be moved to SDK spec no?

Reviewer 6: But in that case it sounds like we shouldn't reference it from the spec.

Reviewer 7: spandata can exists at the SDK level, there needs to be some sort of common concrete type that exporters can use

Reviewer 5: At this moment (in Java) we actually get a low-level interface that returns the (read-only) protobuf representation of a `Span`. Wondering if that is, well, low-level ;)

**Returns:** `Void`

### OnEnd(SpanData)

`OnEnd` is called when a span is ended and `Span.isRecordingEvents()` is true.
This method is called synchronously on the execution thread, therefore it should not block or throw an exception.

**Parameters:**

* `SpanData` - a readable span object.

**Returns:** `Void`

### Shutdown()

Shuts down the processor. Called when SDK is shut down. This is an opportunity for processor to do any cleanup required.

Shutdown should be called only once for each `Processor` instance. After the call to shutdown subsequent calls to `onStart` or `onEnd` are not allowed.

Shutdown should not block indefinitely. Language library authors can decide if they want to make the shutdown timeout to be configurable.

## Built-in span processors

### Simple processor

> The implementation of `SpanProcessor` that passes ended span directly to the configured `SpanExporter`.

Reviewer 6: What's the relationship between processors and exporters? It seems like we're using processors to (1) expose span start and end hooks to vendors and (2) batch spans to send to the exporter. Why use the same component for both?

If processors can't modify the spans that they pass to the exporters, why not call the processors and exporters in parallel?

Author: > If processors can't modify the spans that they pass to the exporters, why not call the processors and exporters in parallel?

From exporter spec:

> Allow implementing helpers as composable components that use the same chainable Exporter interface. SDK authors are encouraged to implement common functionality such as queuing, batching, tagging, etc. as helpers. This functionality will be applicable regardless of what protocol exporter is used.

The processor can be considered as a helper for the exporter. Perhaps we should document this in the first section. The exporter should only export and do not batch.

Reviewer 2: In my mind the model was this:

SDK -> SpanProcessor (an implementation that batches all Spans) -> SpanExporter(List<SpanData/SpanProto>).

SpanExporter is one of the functionality that we can implement with the SpanProcessor, but for example some implementation may implement a SpanProcessor that adds extra attributes onStart.

Reviewer 5: @bogdandrutu  Maybe it would be worth adding a note here, to mention that (custom) `SpanProcessor`s can actually modify the received `Span`?

**Configurable parameters:**

> * `exporter` - the exporter where the spans are pushed.

Reviewer 4: How to register multiple exporters?

Author: At least in Java there is  `MultiSpanExporter` exporter implementation which exports data to multiple exporters.

Author: @bogdandrutu shall we add `MultiSpanExporter` to the spec? I think it's an implementation detail.

Reviewer 2: I agree, let's not be too restrictive about the implementation.

### Batching processor

The implementation of the `SpanProcessor` that batches ended spans and pushes them to the configured `SpanExporter`.

First the spans are added to a synchronized queue, then exported to the exporter pipeline in batches.

> When the queue gets half full a preemptive notification is sent to the worker thread to wake up and start a new export cycle.

Reviewer 6: Does this mean we export faster than the scheduled interval when the queue is half full?

In any case this sounds to me like documentation for the java implementation. What about something like "The implementation is responsible for managing the span queue and sending batches of spans to the exporters."?

Author: Yes, this text is originally from javadoc.  We can make it more generic and give the implementors more freedom how the queue is managed and when it is flushed.

This processor can cause high contention in a very high traffic service.

**Configurable parameters:**

* `exporter` - the exporter where the spans are pushed.

> * `maxQueueSize` - the maximum size of the queue. After the size is reached spans are dropped.

Reviewer 4: Do we have any default values for these params?

Author: There are defaults in Java https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java/blob/master/sdk/src/main/java/io/opentelemetry/sdk/trace/export/BatchSampledSpansProcessor.java#L92. I think we could use the same across languages.

Reviewer 4: Does it make sense to add those here?

Reviewer 6: That seems like the wrong level of abstraction for the spec. Most other defaults and constants aren't documented here unless they're defined in other places, e.g. the W3C header length limits.

> * `scheduledDelayMilllis` - the delay interval between two consecutive exports.

Reviewer: Another option is `exportInterval`, `actualDelayMilllis = max(0, exportInterval - timeTakenToExport)`.
Wish to discuss here and see which one is preferred.

Reviewer: One scenario is "I want to export traces/logs/metrics every 5 seconds" and "I don't expect to export data every 7 seconds due to the fact that export operation itself is using 2 seconds in environment XYZ".

Author: > One scenario is "I want to export traces/logs/metrics every 5 seconds" and "I don't expect to export data every 7 seconds due to the fact that export operation itself is using 2 seconds in environment XYZ".

The `export` should not be called concurrently, this is from exporter spec:
```
Export() will never be called concurrently for the same exporter instance. Export() can be called again only after the current call returns.
```

# Span processor

Span processor is an interface which allows hooks for span start and end method invocations.

> The span processors are invoked only on sampled spans. This interface can be used as a helper for span exporter to batch and convert spans see [sdk-exporter-spec](sdk-exporter.md).

Reviewer 5: Not sure this is quite correct - the Java implementation has in all their processors this:

```java
  @Override
  public void onEnd(ReadableSpan span) {
    if (!span.getSpanContext().getTraceOptions().isSampled()) {
      return;
    }
```

Which means the processors themselves are invoked on all the `Span`s, and from there they might as well decide to ignore them based on the sampling information/hint.

Author: The processors are invoked only for `RecordEventsReadableSpan` which represents a sampled span or if record events is set to true.

I will change the text to remove sampled.

Author: Actually, I have changed it to `isRecodringEvents`

> The span processors are invoked only when `IsRecordingEvents` is true [api-tracing](api-tracing.md#isrecordingevents). This interface can be used as a helper for span exporter to batch and convert spans see [sdk-exporter-spec](sdk-exporter.md).

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
The span processors are invoked only when [`IsRecordingEvents`](api-tracing.md#isrecordingevents) is true. This interface can be used as a helper for [span exporters](sdk-exporter.md) to batch and convert spans.
```

Formatting nits :)

> Span processors can be registered directly on SDK Tracer. The processors are invoked in the same order as they were registered.

Reviewer: Where is this interface defined?

Reviewer: I would want to see something like `Tracer.RegisterSpanProcessor` covered in this PR.

Author: I think that should belong to the tracer SDK spec, which we don't have at the moment.

Author: I have created https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/217

## Interface definition

> ### OnStart(SpanData)

Reviewer 2: In order to allow performance improvements and lazy initialized the SpanData I would suggest we go with a `ReadableSpan` which may expose some properties directly and a `toSpanData` or `toSpanProto`. The reason is that you don't want to construct that object all the time unless someone really needs it. Maybe a `LazySpanData` or something similar achieves the same thing.

Other fields that I have in mind may be information like isOutOfBand added in https://github.com/open-telemetry/rfcs/pull/8. So I think we need to expose an interface here that allows us to also expose other data.

Reviewer 2: Also I heard that some implementation of the SpanProcessor may want to add attributes to the Span itself or events. So it may be interesting to here if the Span itself should be exposed (maybe the SdkSpan that can have extra capabilities).

Author: I didn't use `ReadableSpan` because it is not defined anywhere, whereas `SpanData` is defined in tracing spec. 

I will rename `SpanData` to just `Span`. The comment in the parameters will says: 

> * `Span` - a readable span object.

> `OnStart` is called when a span is started.

Reviewer 9: I am pondering about naming it `OnCreate` instead of `OnStart`.

The spec has a section named [Span Creation](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/master/specification/api-tracing.md#span-creation) and not "Span Start", though it does not mandate the method name.

In the Java implementation, start vs create does not seem to create ambiguity. But in Python, we have both [`tracer.create_span(name)` and `tracer.start_span(name)`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-python/blob/96e5bc1327ff9b3f0d72d484302d72810e607d32/opentelemetry-api/src/opentelemetry/trace/__init__.py#L304-L315).

I believe the intent of `OnStart` is to be called regardless of whether the span is created with `create_span` or with `start_span` so I think the naming `OnStart` would be clearer.

What do you think?

Reviewer 5: Having `OnCreate` would mean differentiating between a non-started and a started `Span`, which would create more (unnecessary) issues IHMO. **Probably** the Specification needs to be updated to make clear that a `Span` is created **and** started.

Btw, as far as I know, the OTel Python (and OC Python) implementation is the only one with such a `create()` method besides a `start_span()`. Not sure we **really** need that there ;)

**Parameters:**

* `SpanData` - a readable span object.

**Returns:** `Void`

### Shutdown()

Shuts down the processor. Called when SDK is shut down. This is an opportunity for processor to do any cleanup required.

Shutdown should be called only once for each `Processor` instance. After the call to shutdown subsequent calls to `onStart` or `onEnd` are not allowed.

Shutdown should not block indefinitely. Language library authors can decide if they want to make the shutdown timeout to be configurable.

## Built-in span processors

### Simple processor

The implementation of `SpanProcessor` that passes ended span directly to the configured `SpanExporter`.

**Configurable parameters:**

* `exporter` - the exporter where the spans are pushed.

### Batching processor

The implementation of the `SpanProcessor` that batches ended spans and pushes them to the configured `SpanExporter`.

First the spans are added to a synchronized queue, then exported to the exporter pipeline in batches.
The implementation is responsible for managing the span queue and sending batches of spans to the exporters.

> This processor can cause high contention in a very high traffic service.

Reviewer: Would like to understand more about **high contention**. Is this because of the queue insertion operation? There are lock-free queue implementations which doesn't have high contention even under heavy traffic.

Another question - do we expect the queue to guarantee FIFO?

Reviewer 2: even a lock-free queue can cause [false sharing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/False_sharing) which is also very bad and hard to quantify.

batching does not require to guarantee fifo, and also can drop spans when high traffic (based on a config). For an example of this see https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java/blob/master/sdk/src/main/java/io/opentelemetry/sdk/trace/export/BatchSampledSpansProcessor.java

We also execute the export on a different thread.

**Configurable parameters:**

* `exporter` - the exporter where the spans are pushed.

> * `maxQueueSize` - the maximum queue size. After the size is reached spans are dropped. The default value is `2048`.

Reviewer: Do we expect a `flush` API?
How do we think about grace period during the application shutdown (e.g. flushing the queue in the exit hook)?

Reviewer 2: I think the SpanProcessor should have at least a shutdown method. Not sure about flush. See https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/master/specification/sdk-exporter.md which in case of the batchspanprocessor should call SpanExporter.shutdown()

Reviewer 2: there is a shutdown method on the SpanProcessor.

Author: Shutdown is already documented

# Span processor

> Span processor is an interface which allows hooks for span start and end method invocations.

Reviewer 10: I am curious why we choose the word "Processor" as opposed to "Exporter"?  In the diagram a processor is used to build an exporter, so it seems like a fine distinction to make.

Reviewer 10: Maybe an answer:

(a) if I must make a copy of the data, it's a Processor
(b) if I can take a reference to the data, it's an Exporter

Reviewer 2: As I posted in the diagram https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/205#issuecomment-526260756 the SDK exposes just an processor for different Span events (start/end).

We build an "export" pipeline by implementing a SpanProcessor (Batch/Simple) that will redirect a List<SpanData(Proto)> to an actual "exporter" or other intermediate steps.

Reviewer 11: > Maybe an answer:
>
> (a) if I must make a copy of the data, it's a Processor
> (b) if I can take a reference to the data, it's an Exporter

In my understanding, it's rather the other way round: A Span-processor gets a mutable reference to a single Span synchronously. A exporter on the other hand may get one or more read-only Spans (or some data transfer object to which the Span was converted) delayed, asynchronously or never (queue full).

Span processors can be registered directly on SDK Tracer and they are invoked in the same order as they were registered.

The following diagram shows `SpanProcessor` relationship to other components in the SDK:

```
  +-----+---------------+   +---------------------+   +-------------------+
  |     |               |   |                     |   |                   |
  |     |               |   | BatchProcessor      |   |    SpanExporter   | 
  |     |               +---> SimpleProcessor     +--->  (JaegerExporter) |
  | SDK | SpanProcessor |   |                     |   |                   |
  |     |               |   +---------------------+   +-------------------+ 
  |     |               |
  |     |               |   +---------------------+
  |     |               |   |                     |
  |     |               +---> ZPagesProcessor     |
  |     |               |   |                     |
  +-----+---------------+   +---------------------+
```

## Interface definition

### OnStart(Span)

`OnStart` is called when a span is started.
This method is called synchronously on the execution thread, therefore it should not block or throw an exception.

**Parameters:**

> * `Span` - a readable span object.

Reviewer 11: I would rather like the Span processor to get a mutable reference to the same span object that is started/ended. I imagine a common use-case for span processors would be to attach context information like thread/coroutine ID, etc.
Although it is true that the Processor (at least in OnEnd) should also be able to read the data, which may or may not be possible with a sdk.Span object. Maybe we must specify an additional Span interface with getters?

Author: > Maybe we must specify an additional Span interface with getters?

The `SpanData` could be considered as a readable interface, however it is going to be removed https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/215/

Reviewer 10: I believe we eliminated `SpanData` from the user-facing API. I could believe it's still meant as a part of the SDK processor API.

Shutdown should be called only once for each `Processor` instance. After the call to shutdown subsequent calls to `onStart` or `onEnd` are not allowed.

Shutdown should not block indefinitely. Language library authors can decide if they want to make the shutdown timeout to be configurable.

## Built-in span processors

### Simple processor

The implementation of `SpanProcessor` that passes ended span directly to the configured `SpanExporter`.

**Configurable parameters:**

* `exporter` - the exporter where the spans are pushed.

### Batching processor

The implementation of the `SpanProcessor` that batches ended spans and pushes them to the configured `SpanExporter`.

First the spans are added to a synchronized queue, then exported to the exporter pipeline in batches.
The implementation is responsible for managing the span queue and sending batches of spans to the exporters.
This processor can cause high contention in a very high traffic service.

**Configurable parameters:**

* `exporter` - the exporter where the spans are pushed.
* `maxQueueSize` - the maximum queue size. After the size is reached spans are dropped. The default value is `2048`.

> * `scheduledDelayMilllis` - the delay interval in milliseconds between two consecutive exports. The default value is `5000`.

Reviewer 12: scheduledDelayMilllis -> scheduledDelayMillis
